

    Sign In
    Register
    Bloomberg.com
    Businessweek.com
    Bloomberg TV
    Premium 

Bloomberg Businessweek
Technology

    Global Economics
    Companies & Industries
    Politics & Policy
    Technology
    Markets & Finance
    Innovation
    Lifestyle
    Business Schools
    Small Business
    Video & Multimedia

Telecom
Prime Time for Telecom Takeovers
By Olga Kharif on February 23, 2012

    Tweet
    Facebook
    LinkedIn
    Google Plus
    0 Comments

Companies Mentioned

    RIMM

    Research In Motion Ltd
        $11.6 USD
        0.06
        0.52%
    ALU

    Alcatel-Lucent/France
        $1.1 USD
        -0.03
        -2.73%
    CSCO

    Cisco Systems Inc
        $18.91 USD
        -0.10
        -0.53%
    MSFT

    Microsoft Corp
        $26.61 USD
        -0.34
        -1.26%
    GOOG

    Google Inc
        $698.37 USD
        6.48
        0.93%
    AAPL

    Apple Inc
        $585.28 USD
        -4.08
        -0.7%
    SCOR

    comScore Inc
        $13.31 USD
        -0.32
        -2.4%
    NOK

    Nokia OYJ
        $3.26 USD
        -0.06
        -1.84%
    SI

    Siemens AG
        $103.5 USD
        0.77
        0.74%

Market data is delayed at least 15 minutes.
Company Lookup

Silver Lake, the largest private-equity company focused on the technology industry, expects buyout firms to zero in on makers of telecommunications and mobile-phone gear this year, spurring a new round of dealmaking.

Private-equity firms will ramp up investments in suppliers of phone equipment and wireless handsets, said Charles Giancarlo, a managing director at Menlo Park, Calif.-based Silver Lake. While he declined to say which companies might be targeted, analysts have named Research In Motion Ltd. (RIMM), Alcatel-Lucent (ALU) and Nokia Siemens Networks Oy as potential takeovers or investment opportunities.

“It’s definitely an area that’s in great transition right now,” Giancarlo, a former Cisco Systems Inc. (CSCO) executive, said in an interview. “There’ll be more private-equity activity.”

Private-equity firms typically swoop into areas where market values of companies have dropped. That lets them snap up businesses—often through a leveraged buyout, which relies on borrowed funds—and try to engineer a turnaround. Networking-equipment makers and related companies worth at least $1 billion have an average price-to-earnings ratio of about 28. That’s less than half the ratio for software and computer-service stocks of the same size, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

Silver Lake has backed telecommunications companies before, including Avaya Holdings Corp. and Skype Technologies SA. After a turnaround effort at Avaya, that company has filed to raise as much as $1 billion in an initial public offering. The IPO will happen as soon as April, people with knowledge of the matter said this month. Skype, meanwhile, was acquired by Microsoft Corp. (MSFT) for $8.5 billion last year.

It’s becoming harder for smaller manufacturers of phones and related equipment to compete, making them cheaper potential takeovers. Smartphones using Google Inc. (GOOG) or Apple Inc. (AAPL) software accounted for 77 percent of U.S. sales during the fourth quarter, according to ComScore Inc. (SCOR). Their dominance has sidelined RIM, the maker of the BlackBerry, which has lost more than three-quarters of its market value over the past year.

RIM’s market share dropped to 16 percent in the fourth quarter, from 18.9 percent in the previous three months, Reston, Va.-based ComScore found.

“It made it very difficult for niche vendors to have a viable business model,” Giancarlo said.

An acquisition by a rival handset or mobile-software supplier is unlikely, as Google, Apple and Microsoft already have the technology they need, said Charlie Wolf, an analyst at Needham & Co. in New York. That leaves a private-equity firm as a more likely suitor.

“The stock is so low that the private-equity firms may go for it,” Wolf said.

Makers of equipment for telecommunications networks face their own challenges. Carriers have consolidated, leaving fewer potential customers. And networking companies are getting squeezed by Chinese companies, such as Huawei Technologies Co. and ZTE Corp. That’s led to stiffer price competition and weighed on stock prices.

“The threat from Huawei should not be underestimated,” said John Byrne, an analyst at Framingham, Mass.-based research firm IDC.

Alcatel, France’s largest telecommunications-equipment supplier, has lost money in five of the past six years and plans to cut as many as 1,800 jobs. The Paris-based company also has been shopping around some of its business units.

Its shares have dropped almost 50 percent in the past year, making it a steal for a potential acquirer, said Michael Mahoney, managing director at Falcon Point Capital LLC, an investment-advisory firm in San Francisco.

“The big story to me is the incredible undervaluation of Alcatel,” he said in an interview. “This stock is a screaming buy. Private equity should be all over this.”

Nokia Siemens Networks, an unprofitable venture backed by Nokia Oyj (NOK) and Siemens AG (SI), also may be a target. It said in November it would eliminate 17,000 jobs, or about 23 percent of its workforce. The company aims to divest some business units as well.

Private-equity firms may try to earn a return on their investments by breaking up companies, making more dramatic cuts or focusing on new markets.

There are many potential opportunities, Giancarlo said.

“This sector, in the consumer and carrier-equipment side, is going to be busier this year,” he said.
Kharif is a reporter for Bloomberg News and Bloomberg Businessweek in Portland, Ore.

    Tweet
    Facebook
    LinkedIn
    Google Plus
    Email
    Print

Reader Discussion Showing 0 Comment now
Email alerts RSS Real-time paused. (Resume)

    Disqus

Join the Discussion

Comments without profanity or abusive language are automatically posted to the site. Bloomberg BusinessWeek reserves the right to delete comments that are off-topic or offensive. Excessively long comments may be moderated as well. Bloomberg cannot facilitate requests to remove comments or explain individual moderation decisions.
Business Exchange: What your peers are reading.
Last Update 04:45 am Most Popular

    Read
    Shared
    Discussed

    Apple's Big Show: Your IPad Just Became Totally Obsolete
    The Gas Station of the Future Just Opened
    McDonald's Staffers See Red Over Prof's Digital Eyewear
    Dollar-Less Iranians Discover Virtual Currency
    Is Concierge Medicine the Future of Health Care?
    The Science Behind Those Obama Campaign E-Mails
    Can Spanx Stores Fit Into America's Malls?
    Business Lessons From a Former Gang Member

Last Update 04:48 am News from Bloomberg

    Merkel Signals Greek Write-Off Possible as Buyback Begins
    Greece Offers 10 Billion-Euro Debt Buyback to Unlock Aid
    Nokia Edge on Speed Opens Way to Gain on IPhone
    Chinese Billionaire Won’t Give Up on Iceland Plan
    European Stocks Climb as Chinese Manufacturing Expands
    Berlusconi Mulls Comeback as Italian Bonds Rally
    France Sexy No More for Entrepreneurs Escaping Hollande
    Singapore Deportations Show Strains in Work Force

Ads by Google

    Canadian Private REITInvest $150K - Receive $1000/month. RSP Eligible. Learn More Now.leagueinvestment.ca
    MBA Without BachelorFor Managers Top British Online MBA in 18 Months -Recognized Worldwidecollege.ch
    Download Google ChromeGoogle's Free, Fast, and Simple Web Browser. Try It Nowwww.google.com/chrome

 by Taboola
Videos You Might LikeSponsored
Morning Movers: Lowe's, Nokia, Sina Corp.
Facebook Volatility Hits Lowest Level Since IPO
Lindzon: Yahoo's Mayer Is a More Aggressive Leader
Major Microsoft Shakeup, Cisco Beats Estimates
Sponsored Links

Systems Management Software
Software Deployment, Patch Mgmt, Asset Mgmt, Remote Control & more. Starts@ $545
www.DesktopCentral.com

Employee Performance Appraisal Software
Award-Winning Performance Appraisal Software. Try eAppraisal Free Today!
www.HalogenSoftware.com

Leading Intrusion Prevention System
Find out why NGIPS is crucial in defending networking attacks - Free Whitepaper
www.sourcefire.com/IPS-Whitepaper

Intel Xeon Phi Training
1, 3, 5 day class for developers at Sunnyvale, CA. Sign up now!
www.colfax-intl.com/xeonphi

One trade. Once a week.
One of our recent stock picks gained +172% in just 2 days. Get this week's pick.
www.tradingauthority.com

Buy a link now!
Elsewhere on Businessweek.com

    Fix This/City Planning
    Fix This/City Planning
    Argentina's 11-Year War With Hedge Funds
    Argentina's 11-Year War With Hedge Funds
    Ahrendts: Burberry Store Is Built for the Future
    Ahrendts: Burberry Store Is Built for the Future
    The March of Robots Into Chinese Factories
    The March of Robots Into Chinese Factories
    Cyber Spies Attack: Is It Safe to Use Public Wi-Fi?
    Cyber Spies Attack: Is It Safe to Use Public Wi-Fi?
    Arif Habib takes a turn at bat near his 2,100-acre Karachi development
    Pakistan, Land of Entrepreneurs
    01.jpg
    Staten Island Starts Over After Sandy
    Will.i.am Wants to Pimp Your iPhone
    Will.i.am Wants to Pimp Your iPhone
    Buying That First Home Is Getting Harder
    Buying That First Home Is Getting Harder
    intro.jpg
    The Holiday Gift Guide
    The Best Business Schools 2012
    The Best Business Schools 2012
    CEO Guide to Virtual Offices
    CEO Guide to Virtual Offices

Social

    Follow us on Twitter
    Join us on Facebook
    Connect with us on LinkedIn
    Subscribe to Bloomberg Businessweek
    Bloomberg

Links

    Our Company
    Advertising
    Careers
    Feedback
    Custom Publishing
    Manage Subscription

    Mobile
    Newsletters
    Privacy Policy
    Reprints & Permissions
    Sitemap
    Terms of Use
    [+] Rate This Page

Get Businessweek Delivered
The Cash-Only Doctors' Club
The Cash-Only Doctors' Club
Subscribe

©2012 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved. Made in NYC Ad Choices
